Source-Code/mcu-firmware/IoT-Bit-esp32/README.md, before:

# IoT-Bit-esp32 Firmware

ESP32-based firmware for connecting the IoT Bit to an MQTT server.

Target board: ESP32

## Overview

1. Wifi and MQTT authentication credentials are read from the SD card.
2. The Bit connects to Wifi.
3. If a Wifi connection is established, the Bit then tries to connect to a MQTT server, authenticate, and subscribe to the `config` and `cmd` topics corresponding to its devices.
4. The Bit configures its devices based on the configuration received on the `config` topic. Configurations information is stored in protocol buffers sent in the payload of MQTT messages published to the `config` topics.
5. The Bit publishes messages with the value of its input devices to the `state` topics whenever the values of the input devices change. The Bit also updates its output devices whenever it receives a message with an updated output value on the `cmd` topics. Lastly, the Bit reports its status and the status of its devices on the corresponding `status` topics.

## Prerequisites

1. ESP-IDF (Espressif IoT Development Framework)

   See [https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/get-started/](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/get-started/)

2. nanopb and protoc (Optional)

   The `compile_protobufs.sh` script found in the `Source-Code/Backend/protobufs` directory can be used to automatically compile the necessary proto files. While technically only nanopb (which ships with this respository) is needed to generate the C implementation of the protocol buffers used in the firmware, the script generates the implementations for both C and python, and therefore also depends on protoc to run correctly in its current form. If you do not wish to install protoc or wish to compile the proto files manually, you may do so solely with nanopb.

## Build

1. Compile the proto files found in `Source-Code/Backend/protobufs` using nanopb
2. Build the `IoT-Bit-esp32` with IDF (e.g. `idf.py build`)
3. Connect the IoT Bit over USB and flash the firmware with IDF (e.g. `idf.py -p /dev/ttyUSB0 flash monitor`)

## Roadmap

### v5.0

- Transition to ESP32-based firmware
- Configuration over MQTT
- Status and config topics for clients
- Command, state, and status topics for devices

### v5.1

- Support for Actions

### v5.2

- Support for Zones

### v5.3

- Generic and specific templates and configurations for clients and devices

Commit message:

add protobufs component to idf project

Source-Code/mcu-firmware/IoT-Bit-esp32/README.md, after:

# IoT-Bit-esp32 Firmware

ESP32-based firmware for connecting the IoT Bit to an MQTT server.

Target board: ESP32

## Overview

1. Wifi and MQTT authentication credentials are read from the SD card.
2. The Bit connects to Wifi.
3. If a Wifi connection is established, the Bit then tries to connect to a MQTT server, authenticate, and subscribe to the `config` and `cmd` topics corresponding to its devices.
4. The Bit configures its devices based on the configuration received on the `config` topic. Configurations information is stored in protocol buffers sent in the payload of MQTT messages published to the `config` topics.
5. The Bit publishes messages with the value of its input devices to the `state` topics whenever the values of the input devices change. The Bit also updates its output devices whenever it receives a message with an updated output value on the `cmd` topics. Lastly, the Bit reports its status and the status of its devices on the corresponding `status` topics.

## Prerequisites

1. ESP-IDF (Espressif IoT Development Framework)

   See [https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/get-started/](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/get-started/)

2. nanopb and protoc (Optional)

   The `compile_protobufs.sh` script found in the `Source-Code/Backend/protobufs` directory can be used to automatically compile the necessary proto files. While technically only `nanopb` (which is submoduled in this repository) is needed to generate the C implementation of the protocol buffers used in the firmware, the script generates the implementations for both C and Python, and therefore also depends on `protoc` to run correctly in its current form. If you do not wish to install `protoc` or wish to compile the proto files manually, you may do so solely with `nanopb`.

   On Debian-based Linux distributions, `protoc` can be installed with `apt install -y protobuf-compiler`.

   The requirements for `nanopb` can be installed with `pip3 install protobuf grpcio-tools`.

## Build

1. Compile the proto files found in `Source-Code/Backend/protobufs` using nanopb. The header files output from compilation should be placed in the `include` directory of the `protobufs` component, and the C files should be placed in the `src` directory of the `protobufs` component. It is highly recommended to use the `compile_protobufs.sh` script for this process since it automates these tasks.
2. Build the `IoT-Bit-esp32` with IDF (e.g. `idf.py build`).
3. Connect the IoT Bit over USB and flash the firmware with IDF (e.g. `idf.py -p /dev/ttyUSB0 flash monitor`).

## Roadmap

### v5.0

- Transition to ESP32-based firmware
- Configuration over MQTT
- Status and config topics for clients
- Command, state, and status topics for devices

### v5.1

- Support for Actions

### v5.2

- Support for Zones

### v5.3

- Generic and specific templates and configurations for clients and devices
